---json
{
  "title": "Titles of Divinity",
  "permalink": false,
  "parent": "Titles of Divinity",
  "content_type": "conclusion"
}
---
Both the imperial cult and Paul’s epistles use the titles “god” and “Son of God.” The ways in which their respective uses overlap, however, are few. Both use the title θεός to communicate a position elevated above ordinary humanity and a measure of authority that matches that position. Both use the phrase υἱὸς θεοῦ&nbsp;with at least a distant connection to the ideals of unity and truth.

The differences between the meanings invested in these titles by their respective users weigh heavily enough to preclude the conclusion that Paul borrowed them from the imperial cult. For the Romans, “god” was a relative label, indicating a measure of respect and reverence without necessarily carrying the life–and-death theological weight that Christianity invests in that title. For Paul, “God” is the one who “made the world and everything in it, being Lord of heaven and earth” (Ac.&nbsp;17.24) and identifying Jesus as “God” meant that in Jesus “the whole fullness of deity dwells bodily” (Col.&nbsp;2.9). In Paul’s writings, this title is invested with rich implications of a unique kind of being, an exclusive position, and a spiritual nature. The Romans in no way assigned such traits to their emperors. Paul recognized that human leaders usurped the title “god” and affirmed the exclusivity and ultimate victory of the one true God against all adversaries.

The title “son of God” functioned differently in each usage. For the Romans, this title linked a ruling emperor to a deified predecessor, while maintaining a healthy distance from directly calling the current emperor divine. For Paul, this title formed a theological equals sign between the words “Jesus” and “God.” Identifying Jesus as God’s Son communicated that he shared essential characteristics of the Father’s nature and that they shared an intimate familial relationship. Beyond this obvious difference, the context of Pauline usage of this title differs greatly from the imperial cult. While the Romans used this phrase only to elevate the emperor, Paul used to it credit his spiritual life to his intimate personal relationship with Jesus. He also used this title to present the resurrection as the chief proof that Jesus is the pre-appointed messianic king of the Old Testament, a meaning entirely absent from the imperial cult. Paul also linked the title “Son of God” with God’s Spirit. No such theology of the Trinity existed in Roman emperor worship.

The dissimilarities between Paul and the imperial cult stand in such sharp relief that it is impossible to conclude that Paul modeled his use of the titles “God” and “Son of God” after the imperial cult in any way. The similarities between the titles are so slight that they can be easily seen as unavoidable similarities that almost any two systems of worship would share. Paul’s foundation for these titles is the Old Testament, not the imperial cult.
